Spydercam is a cable-suspended camera system, and rigging system used in making motion pictures, television and at athletic stadiums. Using computer controlled winches to drive synthetic lines connected to a crane, truss or buildings to achieve multidimensional, repeatable movement.  Spydercam is used as an alternative to other camera movement systems.According to the maker's website, Spydercam has been used in the following films:

History
Founded in 1992 by Earl Wiggens as a stunt and rigging company, Spydercam quickly became the standard for suspended camera work. Joined later, and now owned by Tim Drnec and Hammer Semmes, they added their unique experiences in Motion control, VFX, stunts, and rope rigging.

General Systems
The manufacturers of Spydercam claim their software is entirely modular, allowing them to work with producers to create their specific shot, but Spydercam also outlines three general systems they call Bullet, Falcon, and Talon.

Bullet
This is a simple, point-to-point rig with a single axis. The Bullet rig is the quickest to set up and implement, and can be rigged horizontally or vertically. Often used for live events, it can start and stop very quickly. The camera is held tight to the highline, which allows for a more stable shot.

Falcon
According to the Spydercam website, the Falcon is the most versatile and widely used of the rigs offered. With two axes, the Falcon allows both horizontal and vertical movement along two separate lines.

Talon
This is a three dimensional rig that allows movement anywhere within its volumetric space. With the most control and variety out of the three general rigs offered by Spydercam, Talon is a sophisticated system.

Competitors
While Spydercam is based in the United States with systems in place around the world and is largely used for film and commercial work, there are several competitors on the market of cable-suspended camera systems. Some of these specialize in other areas of film, including sports footage. 
Spidercam is a European company that was established in the early 2000s and is mainly used for sporting events such as the Pakistan Super League, Bundesliga, Rugby World Cup, UEFA Champions League, Premier League, Ultimate Fighting Championship, US Open (tennis), Indian Premier League, and French Open. Skycam and Cablecam are consolidated under Skycam, which preceded the other systems mentioned. Skycam was established in 1984 in the United States. It can replicate previsual plans to a high degree of accuracy.

References
External links
Official website