Middle East Bank Kenya is a commercial bank in Kenya. It is licensed by the Central Bank of Kenya, the central bank and national banking regulator.The bank is a small retail bank, that focuses on meeting the needs of large corporations and high-net-worth individuals. As of December 2013, the bank was ranked number 41, by assets, out of a total of 43 commercial banks in Kenya. as of December 2020, the bank's total assets were valued at about US$100 million (KES:11.02 billion), with shareholders' equity of approximately US$13 million (KES:1.124 billion).

History
Middle East Bank Kenya Ltd started operations in Kenya in August 1981, after receiving a banking license from the Central Bank of Kenya, the national banking regulator. The initial shareholders in the bank were the Al-Futtaim Group, affiliated with the Middle East Bank Group of United Arab Emirates. In 1991, the Al-Futtaim Group divested from the bank, leaving shareholding in Kenyan hands.In 1995, Banque Belgolaise, a Belgian financial institution acquired 25% shareholding in Middle East Bank Kenya, becoming the single largest shareholder. As a result of multiple bank mergers and acquisitions, that 25% shareholding subsequently came to be owned by BNP Paribas Fortis. 75% shareholding remains in private Kenyan hands.

Ownership
The shares of stock of Middle East Bank Kenya are privately held. The largest single shareholder, with 25% shareholding, is BNP Paribas Fortis, a Belgian financial services provider that is a subsidiary of BNP Paribas, a French banking conglomerate that is the largest banking group in the world. Shareholding in Meddle East Bank is depicted in the table below:

Branch network
as of December 2020, the bank maintains its headquarters in Nairobi, Kenya's capital and largest city. It has three branches; two in Nairobi and another in Mombasa, Kenya's second-largest city.
Main Branch –  Mebank Tower, Milimani Road, Nairobi
Industrial Area Branch – Butere Road, Off Dar es Salaam Road, Nairobi
Mombasa Branch – Nkrumah Road, Mombasa
Eldoret Branch –Enterprise Road , [Nairobi]

See also
List of banks in Kenya
Central Bank of Kenya
Economy of Kenya

References
External links
Website of Central Bank of Kenya
Addresses of Major Kenyan Commercial Banks